# Complete Linux Commands Cheat-Sheet

This document gives you the detailed documentation of all the Linux Commands.

## History of LINUX

Linux came from a Unix family, Linux is a free and open-source software operating system, which Linus Torvalds developed in September 1991. In 1991, Linus Torvalds was a student at the University of Helsinki, Finland, USA. He developed the first code of Linux 0.01 and post it on the Minix newsgroup on 17 Sep 1991, his code became so popular that people encouraged him to develop new code and he was led to develop new code and release the first “official” version of Linux, version 0.02 on October 5, 1991. Today many years passed and Linux become one of the most popular operating systems. Today 90% fastest Supercomputers out of 500 runs on Linux variants including the top 10.

## Linux File System Hierarchy 

In Linux everything is represented as a file including a hardware program, the files are stored in a directory, and every directory contains a file with a tree structure. That is called File System Hierarchy. Linux uses single rooted, inverted tree-like structure. Root Directory represents with / (forward slash). It is a top-level directory in Linux.

### ```/ ```

The base of the Linux directory is the root. This is the starting point of FSH (File System Hierarchy. Every directory arises from the root directory. It is represented by a forward slash (/). If someone says to look into the slash directory, they refer to the root directory.


### ```/root ```

It is the home directory for the root user (superuser).

### ```/home``` → Home Directory 

It contains secondary users home directory. 

### ```/bin``` → User Binaries 

Contains binary executable. Common Linux commands you need to use in single-user modes are located under this directory. Commands used by all the users of the system are located here. 

### ```/sbin``` → SystemBinaries 

Files Just like /bin, /sbin also contains binary executables. But, the Linux commands located under this directory are used typically by system administrator, for system maintenance purpose. For example: iptables, reboot, fdisk, ifconfig, swapon.

### ```/usr``` → User Binaries 

The /usr directory contains applications and files used by users, as opposed to applications and files used by the system.

### ```/dev``` → Device

It contains hardware device files, Contains device files. These include terminal devices, usb, or any device attached to the system. For example: /dev/tty1, /dev/usbmon0 

### ```/var``` → Variable Files

The variable data files such as log files are located in the /var directory. File contents that tend to grow are located in this directory. > This includes 

◦ ```/var/log```: System log files generated by OS and other applications.

◦ ```/var/lib```: Contains database and package files. 

◦ ```/var/mail```: Contains Emails. 

◦ ```/var/tmp```: Contains Temporary files needed for reboot.

### ```/mnt``` → Mount Directory 

This directory is used to mount a file system temporarily.

### ```/media``` → Removable Media Devices 

The /media directory contains subdirectories where removable media devices inserted into the computer are mounted. 

### ```/etc``` → Configuration files

It contains all configuration files of server. The core configuration files are stored in the /etc directory. It controls the behavior of an operating system or application. This directory also contains startup and shutdown program scripts that are used to start or stop individual programs. 

### ```/boot```→ Boot Loader Files 

The /boot directory contains the files needed to boot the system — for example, the GRUB boot loader's files and your Linux kernels are stored here. 

### ```/op```t → Optional Applications 

The opt directory is used for installing the application software from third party vendors that are not available in the Linux distribution. Usually, the software code is stored in the opt directory and the binary code is linked to the bin directory so that all users can run that software.

### ```/tmp``` → Temporary Files 

Directory that contains temporary files created by system and users. Files under this directory are deleted when system is rebooted.


## Shell Shortcuts for Bash 

**Ctrl-A** (jump to start of line) 

**Ctrl-E** (jump to end of line) 

**Ctrl-K** (delete (kill) everything from the cursor onwards)

**Ctrl-W** (delete the previous word only) 

**Ctrl-Y** (paste whatever was just deleted) 

**Ctrl-C** (kill/exit a running process) 

**Ctrl-L** (clear the screen) 

**Ctrl-R** (search for previously executed commands) 

**Tab** (auto-complete command or file/directory name) 

↑ / ↓  (scroll back / forwards through previously entered commands)

## Basic Commands 

```#pwd``` → it shows the present working directory 

```#ls``` → it shows available files and directory list in the present working directory. 

```#uname``` → it shows the name of the kernel (OS) 

```#uname -r``` → it shows version of the kernel 

```#cd``` → it is used for change directory 

```#clear``` → it is used for clear screen 

```#whoami``` → it shows currently login user name 

```#history``` → it shows list of previously used commands 

```#date``` → it shows time and date

## Listing files and directories (ls)

To get the list of files and directories in your current location: ```ls```

The ls command lists the contents of your current working directory. However, it does not cause all the files in your home directory to be listed, but only those ones whose name does not begin with a dot (.) Files beginning with a dot (.) are known as hidden files and usually contain important program configuration information. They are hidden because you should not change them unless you are familiar with Linux. To list all files in your home directory including those whose names begin with a dot, type 
```ls -a```

```ls``` is an example of a command which can take options: -a is an example of an option. The options change the behaviour of the command. Each option modifies the behaviour of the command. Such as

* **`ls -l`** → Shows files in a detailed list (size, date, permissions).
* 
* **`ls -lt`** → Shows detailed list sorted by **newest first**.
* 
* **`ls -lS`** → Shows detailed list sorted by **largest file first**.
* 
* **`ls -lrS`** → Shows detailed list sorted by **smallest file first** (reverse size).
* 
* **`ls -lrt`** → Shows detailed list sorted by **oldest first** (reverse time).


## The directories ```.``` and ```..```

In any directory, type ls -a As you can all files and directories. But there are two special directories called ```.``` and ```..``` in every directory. In Linux ```.``` means the current directory, so typing ```cd .``` (There is a space between cd and the dot). There is normally always a space between the command and the argument. This may not seem very useful at first, but using (.) as the name of the current directory will save a lot of typing, as we shall see later in the tutorial. ```..``` means the parent of the current directory(previous directory), so typing ```cd ..``` will take you one directory up the hierarchy. Try it now. Typing cd with no argument always returns you to your home directory. This is very useful if you are lost in the file system.

## Making Directories (mkdir)

To create a directory(folder) in your current working directory: ```mkdir dir1```

To create multiple directories ```mkdir dir1 dir2 dir3```

To create directory path (directory inside directory) ```mkdir -p teacher/subject/documents```

To create specific number of directories with same name (students{1}, students{2}, and son on) ```mkdir students{1..10}```

To see the directory you have just created, type ```ls```

## Changing to a different directory ```cd``` 

The command ```cd``` directory means change the current working directory to another directory. The current working directory may be thought of as the directory you are in, i.e. your current position in the file-system tree. To change to the directory you have just made, type ```cd teacher```

To go to spectific location in FSH type that complete location with cd e.g. ```cd /home/user3/documents/```

Type ```ls``` to see what is inside that directory

## Pathnames ```pwd``` 

Pathnames enable you to know where you are in relation to the whole file-system. For example, to find out the absolute pathname of your home-directory, type cd to get back to your home-directory and then type 

```pwd``` 

Output:```/home/n/nye1```

## ```~``` (your home directory) 

Home directories can also be referred to by the tilde ```~``` character. It can be used to specify paths starting at your home directory. So typing ```ls ~/my-dir``` will list the contents of your my-dir directory, no matter where you currently are in the file system. 

What do you think the following would list? ```ls ~```

What do you think the following would list? ```ls ~/..```

## Copying Files and Directories (cp)

```cp file1 file2``` is the command which makes a copy of file1 in the current working directory and calls it file2. What we are going to do now is to take a file stored in an open access area of the file system, and use the cp command to copy it to you’re teacher directory. First, change to your teacher directory ```cd ~/home/teacher```. Then at the shell prompt type: 

```cp /cm/shared/training/tutorial/science.txt . ```

Don't forget the dot (.) at the end. Remember, in UNIX, the dot means the current directory. The above command means copy the file science.txt to the current directory, keeping the name the same. Directories can also be copied with the cp command, but it’s necessary to add the option ```-R``` to do so. This option means ‘recursive’ and will copy the contents of the directory as well as the directory itself, for example: 
```cp -R directory1 directory2 ```

Try running 
```cp -R /cm/shared/training/tutorial ~/home/teacher Exercise```

**The cp command have following options:**

```-r``` for recursive (to copy files/directories inside directory)

```-v``` for verbose (to display what is happening on sceen)

```-```for forcefully (perform action forcefully)

For Ecample:
```cp -rvf /etc/abc.cfg /home```

To copy all data which start form D alphabet

```cp -rvf /root/D* /home```

## Moving or Renaming files and Directories (mv)

The move command has a variety of similar but subtly different uses. It can be used to move a file to a different location (i.e. a different directory). It can also be used to move multiple files to a different directory. It can also be used to rename a file or a directory. For example: 

To move file1 from the current directory into directory1
```mv file1 directory1/ ```

To move file1, file2 and file3 from the current directory into directory1
```mv file1 file2 file3 directory1/``` 

This would rename file1 as file2
```mv file1 file2 ```

This would rename a directory
```mv directory1/ directory2/ ```

To move and rename a file
```mv file1 directory/file2 ```

## Removing Files ```rm``` and Directories ```rmdir```

To delete (remove) a file, use the ```rm``` command. As an example, we are going to create a copy of the science.txt file then delete it. Inside your directory, type 
```cp science.txt tempfile.txt ``` and then
```ls ```
Now delete it 
```rm tempfile.txt ``` Again 
```ls```. Now this file will be removed

In order to delete an empty directory you can use the command 
```rmdir directory1```

However this won't remove directories that already have files in them, instead you can use 
```rm -r directory2```
to recursively delete files in directory **(use sparingly - there is no Recycle bin!)** You can use the rmdir command to remove a directory (make sure it is empty first). Try to remove the backups directory. You will not be able to since Linux will not let you remove a non-empty directory.

**The rm command have following options:**
```-r```for recursive (to delete files/directories inside directory)
```-v``` for verbose (to display what is happening)
```-f``` for forcefully (perform action forcefully)

For Example:
```rm -rvf /home/directory3```

## Displaying the contents of a file on the screen 

clear (clear screen) Before you start the next section, you may like to clear the terminal window of the previous commands so the output of the following commands can be clearly understood. At the prompt, type 
clear 
This will clear all text and leave you with the prompt at the top of the window. 
cat (concatenate) 
The command cat can be used to display the contents of a file on the screen. Type: 
cat science.txt 
What if the file is longer than the size of the window, so it scrolls past making it unreadable. 
less The command less writes the contents of a file onto the screen a page at a time. Type less science.txt Press the space bar if you want to see another page, type q if you want to quit reading. As you can see, less is used in preference to cat for long files. University of Leicester | Tutorial Two 8 head The head command writes the first ten lines of a file to the screen. First clear the screen then type head science.txt Then type head -5 science.txt What difference did the -5 do to the head command? tail The tail command writes the last ten lines of a file to the screen. Clear the screen and type tail science.txt How can you view the last 15 lines of the file?
